To begin, let’s illustrate the importance
of helping our Bible students
to avoid bad association,
and we’ll use the example
of a prospector.
When a prospector
finds something valuable
deep underground,
what does he do?
He must make certain
that the way in is secured
and that it’s well supported.
Otherwise, the treasure
might be plundered
or the way in could collapse.
This is similar to what
we must be aware of when it comes
to helping our Bible students.
We work hard to reach the hearts
of responsive ones, don’t we?
When we do, with Jehovah’s help,
we continue assisting them
to secure and protect their hearts.
This includes protecting
their growing faith in Jehovah.
Otherwise, the Devil
will ruin what has been done
and strip them of their faith.
If we are to help our students to progress,
we must keep in mind why avoiding
bad associations is so important.
We must also have in mind
how we can help
our students to do this.
Let’s first look at why
this is so important.
In order for your Bible students
to gain Jehovah’s friendship,
they will likely need to make some changes
in their choice of association.
Why?
Because your student’s progress
is greatly affected
by his or her choice of friends.
Proverbs 13:20
explains why this is true.
Please go to that verse,
Proverbs 13:20.
It reads:
“The one walking with the wise
will become wise,
but the one who has dealings
with the stupid will fare badly.”
Why does a person’s choice
of associates matter?
Because we cannot change
what the verse says here
—“The one [who is] walking . . .
[or] has dealings with the stupid
will fare badly.”
The fact is that our friends affect us
in either a good way
or a bad way, don’t they?
In the Hebrew language,
to have “dealings with” someone
can mean to “keep company” with a person,
that is, to be friends with a person.
If a Bible student seeks company
with senseless people,
he or she will not progress spiritually.
That’s why it’s so important
to help our Bible students
to avoid the problems
that come with bad association.
On the other hand, from Proverbs 13:20,
we learn that “the one walking
with the wise will become wise.”
Here the idea of walking with someone
involves choosing
to spend time with a person.
So help your Bible students
to choose well.
Wholesome associates in the truth
will help your students to break free
from worldly thinking and unclean practices.
With this in mind, now that we
have considered why we must help them,
let’s look some more
at how we can do so.
In the following dramatization,
note how Neeta helps her Bibles student
to seek out and select
good associates or friends.
“Do not be misled.
Bad associations spoil useful habits.”
OK, but what are good associations?
Well, we have wholesome gatherings
with our brothers and sisters
from the congregation,
and we eat and talk.
And some like to play musical instruments,
and they’ll do
renditions of original songs.
And we have a really nice time.
Yeah, I don’t do that.
It’s not boring.
Sure it’s not.
Well, what do you do?
Yeah, you wouldn’t do that.
It’s not exactly wholesome.
But you have to have fun, right?
True, and we do.
See for yourself.
I’m having some people
over this weekend.
Why don’t you come?
It wasn’t the club,
but it was still fun.
Did you take note of how Neeta helped
her Bible student to seek good friends?
For one thing,
she was empathetic, wasn’t she?
Neeta understood that her Bible student
would need to see
and experience
some things for herself.
Also, she invited her student
to a gathering of brothers and sisters,
and the impact
of that positive experience was obvious.
Likewise, when it comes
to how we can help our Bible students,
remember to be empathetic as well.
All of us naturally desire to have friends.
Keep that in mind
as you strive to help your students.
It can be difficult for them
to seek out good associates.
After all, this is all new for them.
Added to this,
as your students accept
and apply Bible standards in their lives,
some of their former friends
will likely reject them.
You can prepare them for this
by showing them what the Bible says,
for example, at 1 Peter 4:4.
In that verse, we are made aware
that people would be “puzzled”
over the changes we make
in order to please Jehovah.
It also tells us that people
might “speak abusively” of us
and reject our changes.
This could even include
members of one’s own family,
and that fact might be difficult
for your students to accept.
How can you help your students
at a time like that?
By giving them a real choice.
Along with helping them
to draw close to Jehovah,
help your students to replace
bad associations with good ones.
Be a friend to your students.
Introduce them
to others in the congregation.
Also, whenever possible,
when the study is over,
why not stay for a while,
talk with them, spend some time,
and really get to know them?
Call your student
whenever he or she is sick.
Show personal interest.
Sit with them at the meetings,
and invite others
to sit in on the study with you.
And as illustrated in the video,
like Neeta,
include your student
in upbuilding social activities.
One formerly unbelieving husband,
who is now an elder,
recalls how a brother helped him.
He said that the brother
took a day off from work
just to watch a ball game with him,
and he thought to himself,
‘He’s normal.’
It’s also important to help
your Bible student understand
that bad association
is not limited to morally debased people.
The Bible tells us that “the whole world
“[the whole world] is lying
in the power of the wicked one.”
So, then, kindly help your students to see
that we must also avoid association
with those who may appear to be morally clean
but who lack faith in the true God Jehovah.
In all of these ways,
we see why we must help
and how we can help our Bible students
to avoid bad associations
and accept good ones.
Remember, we must help them
to secure the way into their heart
and protect their faith.
As your students do this
by avoiding bad associations,
they will no doubt gain
many lifelong friends, including you.
And whether your student is a family member
or someone you meet in the ministry,
you will both have precious memories
and joy that will last forever.
Brother Anthony Morris,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“Help Your Bible Students
to . . . Overcome Unclean Habits.”